If you buy a can of Red Bull, you'll
probably pay about $3 or your local
currency's equivalent. 9 cents of that
goes towards paying for actually making
the beverage you consume. The rest goes
towards everything else. And as you
undoubtedly know, in Red Bull's case,
everything else is a tremendous amount.
Some slim portion of that $3 goes
towards paying for this, the company's
headquarters. And this company
headquarters is so far from normal. It's
not in a major city. It's not even in a
minor city. [music] It's in the small
Austrian mountain town of Fushani.
This is a town with one supermarket, two
coffee shops, one bank, and one globally
known multinational beverage enterprise.
For one of the world's most recognizable
brands, it's a remarkably tiny global
HQ. It'd take no longer than 3 minutes
to walk from one side of the property to
the other, and it's bounded by an
insurance broker on one side,
residential homes on another, and a
small hotel on the third. It's got no
walls or fences or gate houses. [music]
In fact, the public is even permitted to
stroll through its gardens. There's no
great strategic logic behind this
location. Rather, Red Bull's co-founder,
Dietrich Matitz, just liked Foo. He
liked the privacy it afforded and the
outdoors it gave access to [music] and
he wanted to live there. The
headquarters's small scale may be
surprising compared to the global
stature of the company, but less so when
considering its actual operating
structure. After all, at its core, Red
Bull is a pretty simple company. It
sells its traditional flavor, a
sugar-free variant, a slightly different
zero sugar version, then 14 different
configurations of traditional and
sugar-free fruit flavored editions. Each
of these is sold in a couple different
sizes to fit different distribution
channels and markets, but that's pretty
much it. That's their entire product
lineup. Compare this to their closest
yet smaller competitor, Monster Energy,
which sells [music] so many different
variants, seasonal, co-branded, and
regional flavors that there's not even a
definitive count of how many different
beverages they sell, though the rough
estimate is around 150 at a given time.
Adding to their simplicity, Red Bull
doesn't even manufacture their own
product. They contract Austrian fruit
juice company Roush to do it for them.
In their early days, Red Bull hardly had
the money to set up dedicated production
facilities, but as part of the small
Austrian business community, co-founder
Masashitz had connections to the Roush
family and convinced them to handle it.
Today, little has changed in this
arrangement but the scale. But even
then, most of the world's Red Bull is
still manufactured in the shadow of the
Alps and all of it by the Fruit Juice
Company. Their largest manufacturing
site is here in Ludesh, Austria. It's
colllocated with a Ball Corporation
factory who's contracted to make Red
Bull's bespoke cans, not used for any
other beverage. While the direct rail
and highway access allows for easy
onward distribution logistics, a similar
setup is replicated mere miles away just
over the border into Switzerland. It's
got a Rous factory, a Ball Corporation
plant, along with direct rail and
highway access, too. Until 2021, every
single can of Red Bull sold anywhere in
the world came from one of these two
sites until the company worked with
Roush to start making product in Red
Bull's biggest market, the US. So, the
setup was replicated a third time in the
outskirts of Phoenix, Arizona. Rous
factory here, Ball Corporation plant
here, rail access here, highway access
there. Keeping a 17 product line with
two manufacturing partners going just
isn't that involved. Which explains why
the vast vast majority of people at Red
Bull do not deal with making Red Bull.
Rather, they focus on what $1 of every
Red Bull sale goes towards, convincing
[music]
you to buy a can.
From its beginning, Red Bull was more a
marketing company than a drinks company.
Prior to co-founding it, Dietrich Master
worked at a consumer goods multinational
called Blendax as the marketing manager
for one of their lines of toothpaste.
This often took him to Asia and at the
time the 70s and 80s energy drinks were
already widespread across the continent
despite being nearly unheard of in the
west. On one of Massachusetts's trips,
as the fable goes, he was sitting at the
bar of the Mandarin Oriental Hong Kong,
chatting with fellow travelers and
flipping through the latest edition of
Newsweek. Inside, he found an article
highlighting that Japan's single [music]
largest taxpayer was energy drinks
manufacturer Lipoviton. Details get a
bit fuzzy and conflicting on what
exactly happened next. But what we know
for sure is that Matashitz hated his
job. He wanted to start his own company.
And these [music] factors combined with
his new awareness of the fortunes found
in energy drinks brought him to TC
Pharmaceutical Industries. The Thai
manufacturers of a drink called Katting
Dang, or in English, Red Bull. Sensing
opportunity, the Austrians struck a deal
with the Thai manufacturer. They'd each
invest $500,000 into a new company, Red
Bull GMBBH, [music] that'd reformulate
and rebrand the product into one
targeted at Western consumers. Cretting
Dang, like most Asian energy drinks at
the time, was sold [music] in small
glass bottles and was intended to be
consumed more as a shot. It was not
about its taste, it was about its
function. Matches spent the next few
years reformulating this baseline into a
drink intended more for sipping. He
wanted something that tasted less like
medicine and more like soda. So he added
carbonation, reduced sweetness,
introduced a touch of acidity, and
expanded the default format into larger
250ml cans. Come April 1st, 1987, after
a prolonged process gaining regulatory
approval to sell the novel product, Red
Bull hit store shelves in its new home
country of Austria. It was initially
positioned as premium and elusive, sold
for far more than the average soda.
Matches went around and convinced bars
one by one to stock [music] it. Its
novelty intrigues people and bartenders
would push it as a mixer to work with
vodka or Jerger. Matches also gorilla
marketed it in the places and contexts
he thought Red Bull would be most
useful. He'd hand it out for free at
university campuses during exam [music]
weeks, businesses that late night taxi
drivers frequented, anywhere where
people would struggle yet want to stay
[music] awake. All his efforts were
compounded by strong word of mouth
spread throughout the small country. The
new product was splashy and it made for
a good topic of conversation. In its
first full year of operations, Red Bull
sold 1.2 million cans. [music] Then it
followed that up with 1.7 the next and
quickly reached profitability, the
hurdle every entrepreneur dreams of. But
after jumping over this first hurdle,
Matches only saw the next one. Red Bull
had to expand in his mind, but he simply
just wasn't allowed to. They were
struggling to gain regulatory approval
in any viable market as national
regulators were wary to approve a
product with torine in particular, a
food additive that lacked any long-term
consumption research, fueling legitimate
fears that frequent consumption of it
could be harmful. Hungary and Slovenia
would allow it and the company did
expand there, but the wealthier, larger
markets to the west just wouldn't budge.
But then Massachusetts just simply got
incredibly lucky.
On January 1st, 1993, the European Union
launched its single market. Now, all
member states would remove almost all
trade barriers, meaning their economies
would effectively morph into one. As
part of this, every product approved for
sale in one EU country was usually, with
some caveats, approved for sale in all
EU member countries. The caveats did
slow launch in many of these markets,
but as they were progressively sorted
out, France was the last EU country to
allow the company in in 2008. But all in
all, Red Bull's prevalence expanded
massively in a short period of time
following the 1993 liberalization. Now
they just needed to convince people to
buy it. Going barto bar wouldn't work
anymore. Matches had to find a way to
get a lot of people to hear about Red
Bull, but he had already actually come
up with the answer. It was late summer
1985. The Austrian Grand Prix was on at
the eye cream, now known as the Red
[music] Bull Ring. Austrian driver
Gerard Burgerer was in the midst of his
second season picking up decent points
in the midfield when a random guy,
Dietrich Mastitz, walked up to him and
pitched his novel business idea to sell
caffeinated soda to the masses. Matosits
offered $10,000 to Burger in exchange
for carrying his drink around in the
paddic using a branded water bottle and
some other small obligations. And even
though this was a borderline offensively
small sum for a Formula 1 sponsorship
deal, Burger genuinely needed the money,
so he agreed. With this, he became the
first of thousands upon thousands of
storied Red Bull athletes. This deal
produced images like this. These images
were how Red Bull got its message out to
the world. It was that this is a high
performance athlete. Their job is to be
the best at whatever they do, and they
drink this beverage that helps them
perform at that level. Every time a high
performance athlete was pictured with a
Red Bull logo, the subconscious of
everyone that saw that image started to
[music] associate Red Bull with
performance. When those people wanted to
perform, they would remember that Red
Bull was what the professionals used to
perform. Then they'd buy it, Red Bull
would earn $3, and they'd use one of
those to do this all again. Still at a
somewhat moderate scale, Red Bull
couldn't afford to sponsor the best of
the best in the very biggest sports. So
they started small into the sports that
matches himself was fixated with and
focused on having the biggest impact in
niche and underdeveloped sports
particularly those involving adrenaline
risk-taking and highly visual moments.
Importantly, Red Bull almost always
sponsored individual athletes rather
than teams, events or leagues. They
focused on finding the best of [music]
the best in whatever they do. Athletes
like Jessica Fox. She's the world's
definitive pre-minent canoe slamist,
having earned three Olympic gold medals
and four world championship titles. Or
freestyle motocross rider Robbie
Madison, who broke the motorcycle jump
world record in 2007, surpassing a
distance even evil conneal himself said
was impossible in landing at 322 ft or
98 m. And even in bigger sports, the
company developed strategies to compound
their dollars' effects by finding less
than preminent athletes who attracted
disproportionate attention. Tom Pidcock,
for example, is a cyclist who is not at
the top of the top in any one
discipline, but earns high name
recognition based on the fact that he's
near the top in both road cycling and
mountain biking, an almost unheard of
combination. He still crossed Tour to
France finish lines in first and won an
Olympic gold medal. And whenever he's
contractually allowed to, he's wearing
pieces of gear adorned with the Red Bull
logo.
In order to attract top tier talent, Red
Bull not only offered a top tier package
of living stipens, travel budgets, and
entry- fee reimbursement, but they also
built a network of top tier coaches,
sport scientists, nutritionists, and
rehab trainers housed in top-notch
training centers in Austria and LA, or
at well-funded training camps in
whatever locations are relevant for a
given sport. The degree of support their
athletes get is often far, far above
what is typical in the niche sports
[music] they touch. But as marketing
spend grew through time, Red Bull had
the ability to compound its awareness
through compounding [music] its
influence in the chosen extreme splashy
yet small sports. They started to not
only sponsor individual athletes, but
transform entire sports. You see, larger
sports have governing bodies. FIFA for
soccer, World Athletics for running, ITF
for tennis. These institutions set
rules, standards, [music] and put on
high level, often championship
competition in their respective domains.
Niche sports often lack these governing
bodies, meaning competition is clunky
[music] with different groups working in
different, sometimes incompatible ways,
leading to a lack of progression and
opportunities at the top end of each
sport. Red Bull would enter these sports
and produce the best funded events with
the biggest prizes, immediately
attracting top level talent, becoming
the event they build their seasons
around, and incentivizing those across
the sport to make their style of
competition compatible with the way Red
Bull did things, naturally standardizing
the sport. [music] In cliff diving, they
produce the cliff diving world series,
the definitive world championship for
the sport. [music] In free ride mountain
biking, the company puts on Red Bull
Rampage, once again the preeminent event
in the sport. The same goes for big air
kite boarding with Red Bull King of the
Air. The biggest athletes, the most
media, the most attention. In parkour
and slacklining and enduro and more,
it's the same. Red Bull's events play a
massive central role. This means that in
many of the world's most visually
interesting sports, the best athletes
take their biggest risks producing the
most captivating moments in front of a
Red [music] Bull logo. People performing
at their highest level while the Red
Bulls are seared into your brain.
Eventually, the energy drink company had
accumulated enough money to have a big
impact in a big sport. And the place to
start was obvious. They'd compete in
Maches's favorite sport. It was time to
enter Formula 1.
Conveniently, Ford was exiting it. They
were losing hundreds of millions of
dollars a year. They weren't winning,
and corporate just no longer considered
it worth it. Being bad at making cars
was not exactly a strong marketing
message for a car company. So, the team
was slated to close up shop at the end
of 2004. Formula 1, the league, wouldn't
automatically allow new entrance without
a lengthy application process. So, it
was far easier for matches to buy Ford's
team. And considering how much money it
was losing, Ford offered it, including
all its infrastructure like staff, a
factory, and an engine contract for just
a single dollar. Red Bull then invested
a ton of money, hired a winning
combination of team principal Christian
her and aerodynamicist Adrien Nuie, and
it worked. By 2009, they won their first
race, and just a year after, they won
both the drivers and the constructor's
championships, starting a [music] 4-year
streak of winning both. their first of
two golden eras, the second including
four drivers and three constructors
championships. While Formula 1 might not
be the biggest sport in many countries,
its uniquely global reach still makes it
one of the world's very biggest
spectator sports leagues, driving just a
simply massive amount of attention
towards the words Red Bull, especially
when they're winning. Red Bull truly
flipped the script on how marketing
works. Rather than creating a fictional
narrative involving their product to
play on TV, they manufactured realworld
moments displaying or implying their
product at use, they built a global,
stunningly legitimate athletics machine
to manufacture moments the world would
crave to see. And they managed to do so
while being a legitimate force for good.
Red Bull, the overall company, hardly
has a net positive for the world. It's
hard to find merit in driving up
caffeine and sugar consumption rates.
But if you set the public health costs
aside, there are many, many corners of
the world of athletics where their
influence has meaningfully improved the
lives of athletes. For that, there are
countless admirable, influential
athletes who feel genuine goodwill
towards the company. Their passions are
better because of this energy drinks
company. This means that plenty of
people, both athletes and fans, don't
think of Red Bull as an energy drinks
company. They think of them as an
institution. This institutionality has
for decades now cemented Red Bull's
position of market supremacy. They are
the energy drinks company. Everyone else
is just those who attempt to emulate.
So, as many of you know, I'm pretty
involved in helping run the streaming
service Nebula. And recently, I very
lightly abused my power to get someone
else to make a show that I really wanted
to watch. We're calling it Day Pass. And
in it, Jason from Not Just Bikes goes
around to various cities and attempts to
get the very most out of a day pass
through their local transit system by
riding every form of public transit the
given city has to offer and seeing some
of its most interesting sites while
[music] he's at it. We figured that if
Anthony Bourdain can do a travel show
through the lens of food, surely one of
the internet's pre-minent public transit
reviewers can do it through the lens of
transit. I've been really enjoying it,
and if you're the average window
reviewer, I think you will, too. And
this is just one of tons of Nebula
originals. longer, higher budget,
innovative projects made possible by the
paidwalled business model of Nebula. The
platform is designed to be a better home
to creators' best work, removing the
click- chasing incentives of an adup
supported video platform and replacing
them with the incentives to make
projects so good that people stay
subscribed for monthtomonth. Even if
it's paywalled, it's really not that
expensive. When you use our link,
nebula.tv/wendover, TV/Wend Wendover,
you'll get a whole 50% off a Nebula
subscription, which brings the cost down
to just $30 for the entire year. There
are other streaming services that are
approaching that per month. And on
Nebula, you can watch all the exclusive
projects that we at Wendover have made,
like The Colorado Problem, a documentary
about the water crisis reshaping the
entire American West, or The [music]
Getaway, a social deduction game show
with a big old twist, or Abolish
Everything, the comedy debate show
filmed in front of a live audience in
NYC. Once again, head over to nebula.tv/
TV/Wendover to sign up for 50% off. And
if you do, thank you because you're
helping to both support Wendover and
build a better creative ecosystem for
independent digital creators.